Newly launched Android game ‘Pak Truck Driver’ is arguably the most exciting driving game to have come out of Pakistan. By putting you behind the wheel of a beautifully decorated truck, it takes you through Pakistan’s breathtaking mountain ranges. Your task is to carry consignments from one location to another while ensuring minimum damage to the shipment. The narrow and dangerous roads, lofty speed breakers, and tricky curves add to difficulty and excitement.The trucking experience of course, is not complete without the flamboyant truck horns and folk music in the background; and ‘Apex Logics’, the developers behind the game, have incorporated these elements into the game with style. Thumbs up for game play
'Pak Truck Driver' is crafted to incentivise good performance. You have two trucks in your garage but you must use only one to clear five levels before you earn keys to the second truck. 


					The trucking experience is not complete without the flamboyant truck horns and folk music in the background. — Photo provided by author
				


The game is based on one long, continuous road, which is divided into multiple stops, through the mountains. Much like in real life, careless driving in the game will not only knock the goods out of your truck, but it will also cost you a life [in the game].Overall, the game is simple but the last few levels stand out as much more challenging than the rest.The 3D graphics are fairly pleasant. The blue sky, rocky, snow-top mountains, green pastures are a leaf out of one the world’s most beautiful destinations.More positives: You are in control
It is always good to have multiple camera angles, although every time you end up sticking to one that gives you more control. 'Pak Truck Driver' gives you the options of being the truck's driver and viewing your decked out truck rumble through the terrain from a slightly more distant angle. Not to worry – the different camera angles have no bearing over the game play.
Carrying logs, barrels, and boxes to their destination safely is the central theme of the game.

The suspension of the truck is fairly responsive. The truck reacts, as they do, when you apply the brakes or take sharp turns. What more; the tilt-to-turn feature may end up helping you burn a couple of calories!The signature Pakistani truck horn is right there to be used. It may not have much use in the game but blowing it is fun nevertheless. Perhaps that is just the nature of our horns.The downside: Unwanted banners
Of course this isn't the perfect truck driving game.Ostensibly, banners and ads are the bread and butter of game developers but it isn't wise to have a banner pop up during game play. 


					The truck reacts when you apply the brakes or take sharp turns. — Photo provided by author
				


It affects your performance adversely, and causes unwanted hindrance. There is also a fair bit of room for improvement in the graphics department.The back of the truck seems paper thin, the speedometer needle doesn’t move, and the dashboard is unrealistically flat and bland.To expect subtlety in Pakistani truck art is plain naivety, yet it feels that the game developers went a bit over-the-top in painting those trucks. Some advice
While 'Pak Truck Driver' is a must-have for those into driving games, the developers can do a bit more to add quality to the player’s experience.  It would be useful to have a scoring system based on the time travelled along integration with Google Play to track records and progress of the players. Newer locations, fresher terrains, and a wider variety of trucks are the requirements of this game. Another feature that could have been improved was the presence of other cars on the roads, as it would be an effective way to increase difficulty and make the experience more exciting for the player.
Nonetheless, this is a novel idea which is executed with style. 'Pak Truck Driver' is one game you must play.The game is available on Google Play store for Android phones, version 4 and above. If you have already played it, do share your thoughts in comments section. The author is a graphic designer and freelance writer with a focus on tech.Do you want your product/service reviewed? Email us at web@dawn.com
