Think you're an expert when it comes to taking selfies? These power-packed, feature-rich smartphones with the best cameras will up your selfie game in no time and make sure every picture you take has the right amount of personality. Here are some of the raging hits in the market if you are looking for budget-friendly smartphones with top quality selfie cams: Sony Xperia XA1 Dual


Video by Sony Xperia


With the double advantage of a dual-SIM card slot, the sleek and powerful Sony Xperia XA1 features a 23 megapixel, f/8.0, 24mm camera. This camera also has the option of detecting phases with a laser hybrid autofocus feature and comes with a 5x zoom option and HDR mode. All of these features make it an excellent pick for those who love taking the perfect selfies wherever they go. HTC Desire Eye


Video by AT&T


The HTC Desire Eye comes with a 13 megapixel camera with a width of 22mm - the wider angle means you can that capture great group selfies without the need of a selfie stick! The front camera also has a front dual-LED flash,which means you can take brighter pictures even when it's dark out there. A great phone to click selfies when you are in dim-lit cafes, or out and about with your friends.Samsung Galaxy C9 Pro


Video by Samsung Mobile


Samsung phones are usually known for their style and displays rather than camera, but this one takes the cake for its powerful selfie camera! The Samsung Galaxy C9 Pro has 16 megapixel sensors, both for its back, as well as front camera. It also lets you adjust the metering in inclusion to exposure and white balance, and makes the photos look rich and acute. OPPO F3


Video by Oppo Pakistan


OPPO F3 features dual selfie cameras that are 16 MP (1/3.1" sensor size, f/2.0)  and 8 MP, f/2.4, which make them perfect for individual as well as group selfies. Beauty 4.0 is a new feature introduced by OPPO in this phone, which gives users several beautification modes to touch up the picture before uploading it on social media. Plus, it also has a smart facial recognition feature that enables the camera to know when there are enough people for a group selfie so it gets wider on its own. In a nutshell, the Oppo F3 has all the cool features that every selfie lover wants in their phone!
This content is a paid advertisement by OPPO Pakistan and is not associated with or necessarily reflective of the views of Dawn.com.
